---
layout: home
title: "ad-introduction"
---

# Introduction

We are interested in analysing fMRI images of autistic individuals to predict ADOS scores. We are going to use the ABIDE (Autism Brain Imaging Data Exchange) dataset for this task. We'll start with introductions to autism, ADOS score, the dataset(s) used, fMRI and so on. 

### What is Autism ?

This post aspires to be a simple and informative introduction to the the group of disorders that have now come to be called as "Autism Spectrum disorders". The brain is an incredibly complex organ. Our brains, though similar in general anatomy and structure are vastly different in terms of neuronal connections, synapses and intensity of electric impulses, neuroplasticity, thickness of regions of the brain etc. The presence or lack thereof of these discriminating features within the brain manifests externally and very visibly as differences in a person's behavior, personality, habits and lifestyle choices. From my perspective and experiences thus far, this diverse world of humans can be split broadly into two categories, the group of humans whose neural development is 'considered' and accepted widely as 'normal' and 'useful' and the group of humans whose neural development is different from rest. In almost every way, the neuro atypical population is very different from its typical counterpart in terms of perceiving, understanding and responding to the external world. 'Neurotypical' and 'NeuroAtypical' are two beautiful and respectful terms coined in this new era of seeming acceptance or at least pronouncing less harsher judgements of neuro atypical people in social and work life situations. Taboos still exist in the minds of people and in how they treat neuro atypical people when confronted with their quirks and eccentricities. Many times, these huge differences in behavior eventually lead to the autistic child/adult being physically/mentally harassed and being ignored, cast outside social circles and generally not being taken seriously by the society, all of which cause the person tremendous frustration, pain and heartbreak and even withdrawal from society.

While ASD is only one of the numerous neurological conditions, it encompasses the known range of disorders that affect social interaction to a great extent. Children and adults with ASD will be slow to integrate with society, find friends, have a tough time understanding body language, eye contact and responding appropriately to subtleties in human conversations and human politics/power struggles. Yet, individuals with ASD can be very creative in the arts or be very quick with numbers and take an obsessive focus on certain topics. For example, a child/adult with ASD can be very interested in learning and sharing their knowledge on an isolated topic in fields like geometry or linear programming or aeroplanes or a very specific form of art/sculpture/painting. They find it comforting to stick to rituals. They plan ahead of time and keep things organized to avoid chaos and uncertainty. Their understanding of the world is very different from that of a non autistic persons' and profound, not surprisingly. It is by no means a disease or a disorder also. It is a condition that inhibits social interaction that seems to come very effortlessly to non autistic people (neurotypical people), thereby limiting their progress in society,  in earning recognition at workplaces and building positive connections in the communities they are part of etc. Individuals on ASD are very diligent, hard working and very disciplined but do not reap the fruits of their work due to social and emotional developmental delays. The autistic child and later adult needs understanding, empathy and support from family members, in school and workplaces and their communities almost throughout their lives in order to see some success in both their personal and professional lives in proportion to the hard work invested.

